Adding second tutorial about Sprites, Animations and Gestures (#749)
flame-engine/flame: tutorials/2_sprite_animations_gestures/README.md

## Sprite

Before starting coding our game, it is important to understand what sprites are and what they are used for.

Sprites are images, or a portion of an image, loaded into the memory, and can then be used to render graphics on your game canvas.

Sprites can be (and usually are) bundled into single images, called Sprite Sheets. That is a very useful technique as it lowers the amount of I/O operations needed to load the game assets because it is faster to load 1 image of 10 KB than to load 10 images of 1 KB each (among other advantages).

For example, on this tutorial, we will have a button that makes our robot run. This button needs two sprites, for the unpressed and pressed states. We can have the following image containing both, this technique is often called sprite sheet.

![Sprite example](code/assets/images/buttons.png)

## Animations

Animation is what gives 2D games life. Flame provides a handy class called `SpriteAnimation` which lets you create an animation out of a list of sprites representing each frame, in sequence. Animations are usually bundled in a single Sprite Sheet, like this one:

![Animation example](code/assets/images/robot.png)

> Flame provides a way for easily turning that sprite sheet into an animation, which we will see how in a few moments.

Reviewer: `Sprite Sheet`

> Flame provides a way for easily turning that sprite sheet into an animation, which we will see how in a few moments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flame provides a way for easily turning that Sprite Sheet into an animation (we will see how in a few moments).
```

> Flame provides a way for easily turning that sprite sheet into an animation, which we will see how in a few moments.

Author: ```suggestion
Flame provides a way for easily turning that Sprite Sheet into an animation, which we will see how in a few moments.
```

## Hands on

> To get started, lets get a Flame `Game` instance running with a structure similar to our [first tutorial](https://github.com/flame-engine/flame/tree/main/tutorials/1_basic_square#building-your-first-game) (if you haven't yet you can follow it to better understand this initial setup).

Reviewer: let's

> To get started, lets get a Flame `Game` instance running with a structure similar to our [first tutorial](https://github.com/flame-engine/flame/tree/main/tutorials/1_basic_square#building-your-first-game) (if you haven't yet you can follow it to better understand this initial setup).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, let's get a Flame `Game` instance running with a structure similar to our [first tutorial](https://github.com/flame-engine/flame/tree/main/tutorials/1_basic_square#building-your-first-game) (if you haven't yet, you can follow it to better understand this initial setup).
```

```dart
void main() {
  final myGame = MyGame();
  runApp(GameWidget(game: myGame));
}

class MyGame extends Game with TapDetector {

  @override
  void update(double dt) {
  }

  @override
  void render(Canvas canvas) {
  }

  @override
  Color backgroundColor() => const Color(0xFF222222);
}
```

> Great! This will just gets us a plain, almost black screen. Now lets add our running robot on the screen:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great! This will just gets us a plain, almost black screen. Now lets add our running robot:
```

```dart
class MyGame extends Game {
  late SpriteAnimation runningRobot;

  // Vector2 is a class from `package:vector_math/vector_math_64.dart` and is widely used
  // in Flame to represent vectors. Here we need two vectors, one to define where we are
  // going to draw our robot and another one to define its size
  final robotPosition = Vector2(240, 50);
  final robotSize = Vector2(48, 60);

  // Now, on the `onLoad` method, we need to load our animation. To do that we can use the
  // `loadSpriteAnimation` method, which is present on our game class.
  @override
  Future<void> onLoad() async {
    runningRobot = await loadSpriteAnimation(
      'robot.png',

>       // `SpriteAnimationData` is a class used to tell Flame how the animation spritesheet

Reviewer: `Sprite Sheet`

>       // `SpriteAnimationData` is a class used to tell Flame how the animation spritesheet

Author: ```suggestion
      // `SpriteAnimationData` is a class used to tell Flame how the animation Sprite Sheet
```

>       // is organized. In this case we are describing that our frames are laid out a horizontal

Reviewer: laid out in a ...

>       // is organized. In this case we are describing that our frames are laid out a horizontal

Author: ```suggestion
      // is organized. In this case we are describing that our frames are laid out in a horizontal
```

>       // sequence on the image, that there are 8 frames, each frame is a sprite of 16x18 pixels,

Reviewer: that each frame

>       // sequence on the image, that there are 8 frames, each frame is a sprite of 16x18 pixels,

Author: ```suggestion
      // sequence on the image, that there are 8 frames, that each frame is a sprite of 16x18 pixels,
```

      // and, finally, that each frame should appear for 0.1 seconds when the animation is running.
      SpriteAnimationData.sequenced(
        amount: 8,
        textureSize: Vector2(16, 18),
        stepTime: 0.1,
      ),
    );
  }

  @override
  void update(double dt) {
    // Here we just need to "hook" our animation into the game loop update method so the current frame is updated with the specified frequency
    runningRobot.update(dt);
  }

  @override
  void render(Canvas canvas) {
    // Since an animation is basically a list of sprites, to render it, we just need to get its
    // current sprite and render it on our canvas. Which frame is the current sprite is updated on the `update` method.
    runningRobot
        .getSprite()
        .render(canvas, position: robotPosition, size: robotSize);
  }

  @override
  Color backgroundColor() => const Color(0xFF222222);
}
```

> When running the game now, you should see our vampire robot running endless on the screen.

Reviewer: endlessly

> When running the game now, you should see our vampire robot running endless on the screen.

Author: ```suggestion
When running the game now, you should see our vampire robot running endlessly on the screen.
```

For the next step, let's implement our on/off button and render it on the screen.

> The first thing we need to do is to add a couple of variables need to reference our button:

Reviewer: needed

> The first thing we need to do is to add a couple of variables need to reference our button:

Author: ```suggestion
The first thing we need to do is to add a couple of variables needed to reference our button:
```

```dart
// We need to add our `TapDetector` mixin here
class MyGame extends Game with TapDetector {
  // Variables declaration, onLoad and render methods omited...

  @override
  void onTapDown(TapDownDetails details) {
    // On tap down we need to check if the event ocurred on the
    // button area. There are several ways of doing it, for this
    // tutorial we do that by transforming ours position and size
    // vectors into a dart:ui Rect by using the `&` operator, and
    // with that rect we can use its `contains` method which checks
    // if a point (Offset) is inside that rect
    final buttonArea = buttonPosition & buttonSize;

    isPressed = buttonArea.contains(details.localPosition);
  }

  // On both tap up and tap cancel we just set the isPressed
  // variable to false
  @override
  void onTapUp(TapUpDetails details) {
    isPressed = false;
  }

  @override
  void onTapCancel() {
    isPressed = false;
  }

  // Finally, we just modify our update method so the animation is
  // updated only if the button is pressed
  @override
  void update(double dt) {
    if (isPressed) {
      runningRobot.update(dt);
    }
  }
}
```

> If we run our game again, we should have the full example running, with our on/off button for our little vampire robot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we run our game again, we should be able to see the complete example, with our on/off button for our little vampire robot.
```

> And with that, we finished this tutorial. Now, with an understanding of sprites, animations and gestures, we can start on building more interactive and beautiful games.

Reviewer: I'm thinking we could have small quick hooks into the next tutorial on the last paragraphs. but we can do that later.

# Basic: Sprites, Animations and Gestures

This tutorial will introduce you to:

 - `Sprite`: Sprites are how we draw images, or portions of an image in Flame.
 - `SpriteAnimation`: SpriteAnimations are animations composed from sprites, where each sprite represents a frame.

>  - Gesture input: Input is a crucial part of game development, on this tutorial you will learn how to use one of the most basic of them, the tap detector.

Reviewer: I think we don't need to say `on this tutorial you will learn` again, that is already the title for this list
```suggestion
 - Gesture input: the most basic input for your game, the tap detector.
```
not sure if my suggestion encompasses everything on the original version but feels weird to repeat the "this tutorial will teach" bit

>  - Gesture input: Input is a crucial part of game development, on this tutorial you will learn how to use one of the most basic of them, the tap detector.

Reviewer 2: Max line length 100?

> All the code of this tutorial code can be found [here](./code) and is based on the Flame `1.0.0-rc8` version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the code of this tutorial code can be found [here](./code) and is based on the Flame `1.0.0-rc9` version.
```
It should be fine with rc9 too right?

> By the end of this tutorial you will have built a simple game which renders a button which when pressed, makes a small vampire robot run, that will look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of this tutorial, you will have built a simple game which renders a button that, when pressed, makes a small vampire robot run. It will look like this:
```

> By the end of this tutorial you will have built a simple game which renders a button which when pressed, makes a small vampire robot run, that will look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By the end of this tutorial you will have built a simple game that renders a button which, when pressed, makes a small vampire robot run. It will look like this:
```
You overuse commas @luanpotter! :smile: 
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/olemiss-writing100/chapter/comma-overuse/

Reviewer 2: Completely changed my mind after reading through half of it, the link is for you @erickzanardo :smile:

Author: Why for me? I overuse commas too? hahahaha

Reviewer: @spydon yeah I was gonna say, I am trying to reduce it! haha

Reviewer: I don't think overusing commas is necessarily a problem, it's a style choice. But a lot of cases you use commas are grammatically wrong @erickzanardo (I will need some extra time to explain properly, hopefully my example fixes help for now)

Reviewer 2: @luanpotter sure, it's a style choice. But for texts like this one, if there are, say, three commas or more, I would take a very careful look if the sentence isn't better suited to be split up into several parts, or formed in another way. Since the flow of reading might otherwise be disrupted. (Not sure if the example was obvious :sweat_smile:)

Reviewer: I do one even better: your whole comment in a single phrase! :D 

> Sure, it's a style choice; but for texts like this one, if there are, say, three commas or more, I would take a very careful look if the sentence isn't better suited to be split up into several parts, or formed in another way -- since the flow of reading might otherwise be disrupted.

What I think is bad and disrupts the flow, for me, are misplaced commas. I don't see any problem with longer phrases but I agree they deserve closer inspection just in case there are better formulations (or errors lurking).

![Preview](./media/preview.gif)

## Sprite

Before starting coding our game, it is important to understand what sprites are and what they are used for.

> Sprites are images, or a portion of an image loaded into the memory, which can then be used to render graphics on your game canvas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sprites are images, or a portion of an image, loaded into the memory, and can then be used to render graphics on your game canvas.
```

Reviewer 2: I think the original is better, or the suggestion feels like it missing something after the `and`?
Maybe even better if split up into two sentences?

Reviewer: ah there is an extra `then` there. if you remove that word you get the sentence I was thinking. but splitting is ok for me as well

> Sprites can be (and usually are) bundled into single images, that is a very useful technique as it lowers the amount of I/O operations needed to load the game assets because it is faster to load 1 image of 10k than to load 10 images of 1kb each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sprites can be (and usually are) bundled into single images, called Sprite Sheets. That is a very useful technique as it lowers the amount of I/O operations needed to load the game assets because it is faster to load 1 image of 10 KB than to load 10 images of 1 KB each (among other advantages).
```

I think we should link an article with more details on the rationale behind spritesheets at the end of this sentence, like: https://gamedev.stackexchange.com/questions/7069/2d-graphics-why-use-spritesheets (or something better.

I think the biggest advantages are (1) just organization and (2) batch GPU calls more effectively (I think this is more important than the IO performance).

Author: I like the idea of linking an article, any suggestion? I would rather link a real article instead of question on a forum like that one

Reviewer: yeah me too but I didn't easily found one (which I thought I would). might require some deeper digging, there must certainly be one haha

> For example, on this tutorial, we will have a button that makes our robot run, this button needs two sprites, one for the unpressed button and another one for the pressed state, so we can have the following image:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, on this tutorial, we will have a button that makes our robot run. This button needs two sprites, for the unpressed and pressed states. We can have the following image containing both:
```

Reviewer 2: And now the tables turned and Erick started overusing commas and Luan split up the sentence! :exploding_head:

Reviewer: I split a lot of sentences!

![Sprite example](code/assets/images/buttons.png)

> This technique is often called sprite sheet.

Reviewer: I think this can be incorporated on the first paragraph

Author: Fixed

## Animations

> Animations is what gives 2D games life, Flame provides a handy class called `SpriteAnimation` which lets you create an animation out of an list of sprites. Animations usually have all its frame's sprite into a single image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Animation is what gives 2D games life. Flame provides a handy class called `SpriteAnimation` which lets you create an animation out of a list of sprites representing each frame, in sequence. Animations are usually bundled in a single Sprite Sheet, like this one:
```

![Animation example](code/assets/images/running.png)

> Flame provides way for easily turning that sprite sheet into an animation, which we will see how in a few moments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flame provides a way for easily turning that sprite sheet into an animation, which we will see how in a few moments.
```

also we should probably decide on a standard way of saying `sprite sheet` (no opinions here)

## Hands on

> To get started lets just get a Flame `Game` instance running and just paste some bolierplate code on the editor, if you haven't yet checked our [first tutorial](https://github.com/flame-engine/flame/tree/main/tutorials/1_basic_square#building-your-first-game) to understand better this initial code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started, lets get a Flame `Game` instance running with a structure similar to our [first tutorial](https://github.com/flame-engine/flame/tree/main/tutorials/1_basic_square#building-your-first-game) (if you haven't yet you can follow it to better understand this initial setup).
```

I think calling our own required setup code boilerplate on the tutorial is counter productive (even though it might be slightly boiler-plate-y haha)

```dart
void main() {
  final myGame = MyGame();
  runApp(
    GameWidget(
      game: myGame,
    ),
  );
}

class MyGame extends Game with TapDetector {

  @override
  void update(double dt) {
  }

  @override
  void render(Canvas canvas) {
  }

  @override
  Color backgroundColor() => const Color(0xFF222222);
}
```

> Great, this will just gets us a plain, almost black screen, now with the game instance running lets first add our running robot on the screen:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Great! This will just gets us a plain, almost black screen. Now lets add our running robot on the screen:
```

```dart
class MyGame extends Game {
  late SpriteAnimation runningRobot;

  // Vector2 is a class from `package:vector_math/vector_math_64.dart` and is widely used
  // in Flame to represent vectors. Here we need two vectors, one to define where we are
  // going to draw our robot and another one to define its size
  final runningPosition = Vector2(240, 50);
  final runningSize = Vector2(48, 60);

>   // Now, on the `onLoad` method, we need to load our animation, to do that we can use the
>   // `loadSpriteAnimation` method, which is present on our game class

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Now, on the `onLoad` method, we need to load our animation. To do that we can use the
  // `loadSpriteAnimation` method, which is present on our game class.
```

  @override
  Future<void> onLoad() async {
    runningRobot = await loadSpriteAnimation(
      'running.png',

>       // `SpriteAnimationData` is a class used to tell Flame, how the animation spritesheet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // `SpriteAnimationData` is a class used to tell Flame how the animation spritesheet
```

>       // is organized, here we are basically telling that our sprites is organized in a horizontal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // is organized. In this case we are describing that our frames are laid in a horizontal
```

Reviewer 2: laid out*, or "organized in a horizontal fashion"

Author: Fixed

>       // sequence on the image, that there are 8 frames, each frame has time frame of `0.1` seconds
>       // and finally, that each frame, is a sprite of 16x18 pixels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      // sequence on the image, that there are 8 frames, each frame is a sprite of 16x18 pixels,
      // and, finally, that each frame should appear for 0.1 seconds when the animation is running.
```

      SpriteAnimationData.sequenced(
        amount: 8,

>         stepTime: 0.1,
>         textureSize: Vector2(16, 18),

Reviewer: I think the explanation is easier to follow if we leave stepTime last

```suggestion
        textureSize: Vector2(16, 18),
        stepTime: 0.1,
```

      ),
    );
  }

  @override
  void update(double dt) {
    // Here we just need to "hook" our animation into the game loop update method so it move
    // in its frame list
    runningRobot.update(dt);
  }

  @override
  void render(Canvas canvas) {
    // Since an animation is basically a list of sprites, to render it, we just need to get its

>     // sprite and render it on our canvas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // current sprite and render it on our canvas. Which frame is the current sprite is updated on the `update` method.
```

    runningRobot
        .getSprite()
        .render(canvas, position: runningPosition, size: runningSize);
  }

  @override
  Color backgroundColor() => const Color(0xFF222222);
}
```

> When running the game now, you should see our vampire robot running endless in the screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running the game now, you should see our vampire robot running (in-place) endlessly in the screen.
```

Reviewer 2: on the screen

Author: Fixed

> For the next step, lets implement our on/off button and render it on the screen:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the next step, let's implement our on/off button and render it on the screen.
```

> First thing we need to do, is to add a couple of variables need for out button:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing we need to do is to add a couple of variables need to reference our button:
```

```dart
  // One sprite for each button state
  late Sprite pressedButton;
  late Sprite unpressedButton;
  // Just like our robot needs its position and size, here we create two
  // variables for the button as well
  final buttonPosition = Vector2(200, 120);
  final buttonSize = Vector2(120, 30);
  // Simple boolean variable to tell if the button is pressed or not
  bool isPressed = false;
```

Next we load our two sprites:

```dart
  @override
  Future<void> onLoad() async {
    // runningRobot loading omited

    // Just like we have a `loadSpriteAnimation` function, here we can use

>     // the `loadSprite`. To use it we just need to inform the assets path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // `loadSprite`. To use it, we just need to inform the asset's path
```

>     // the `loadSprite`. To use it we just need to inform the assets path
>     // and the position and size which will define the section of the image

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // the `loadSprite`. To use it we just need to pass it the asset's path
    // and the position and size which will define the section of the image
```

    // that we want. If we wanted to have a sprite with the full image, `srcPosition`
    // and `srcSize` could just be omited
    unpressedButton = await loadSprite(
      'buttons.png',
      // `srcPosition` and `srcSize` here tells `loadSprite` that we want
      // just a rect (starting at (0, 0) with the dimensions (60, 20)) of the image
      // which gives us only the first button
      srcPosition: Vector2.zero(),
      srcSize: Vector2(60, 20),
    );

    pressedButton = await loadSprite(
      'buttons.png',
      // Same thing here, but now a rect starting at (0, 20)
      // which gives us only the second button
      srcPosition: Vector2(0, 20),
      srcSize: Vector2(60, 20),
    );
  }

> ```

Author: I just noticed that we haven't documented the SpriteSheet class, I think I will leave this for a follow up for when we have that class with docs to link to.

Finally, we just render it on the game `render` function:

```dart
  @override
  void render(Canvas canvas) {
    // Running robot render omited

    if (isPressed) {
      pressedButton.render(canvas, position: buttonPosition, size: buttonSize);
    } else {
      unpressedButton.render(canvas,
          position: buttonPosition, size: buttonSize);

>     }

Author: I always wonder if it is bad to declare a new variable on the render method, even if that new variable is just pointing to something already allocated in the memory.

>     }

Reviewer: that is pretty much free :)

  }
```

You now should see the button on the screen, but right now, it is pretty much useless as it has no action at all.

So, to change that, we will now add some interactivity to our game and make the button tapable/clickable.

Flame provides several input handlers, which you can check with more in depth on the [input documentation of Flame](https://github.com/flame-engine/flame/blob/main/doc/input.md). For this example we will be using the `TapDetector` which enables us to detect taps on the screen, as well as mouse click when running on web or desktop.

> All of Flame input detectors are mixins which can be added to your game, which when applied, enables you to override listener methods related to that detector. In our example, we will need to override three methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All Flame input detectors are mixins which can be added to your game, enabling you to override listener methods related to that detector. For the `TapDetector`, we will need to override three methods:
```

>  - `onTapDown`: Called when touch/click has started. i.e. the user just touced the screen or clicked the mouse button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `onTapDown`: Called when touch/click has started, i.e., the user just touced the screen or clicked the mouse button.
```

>  - `onTapUp`: Called when the touch/click has stop ocurring because the event was release. i.e. the user lifted the finger from the screen or released the mouse button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `onTapUp`: Called when the touch/click has stop occurring because the event was released, i.e., the user lifted the finger from the screen or released the mouse button.
```

>  - `onTapCancel`: Called when the event was cancelled, this can happen for several reasons, one of the most common reason is when the event has changed into another type, like for example the user started to move the finger/mouse and the touch event now turned into a pan/drag type. Usually we can just threat this event as the same as `onTapUp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `onTapCancel`: Called when the event was cancelled. This can happen for several reasons; one of the most common is when the event has changed into another type, for example the user started to move the finger/mouse and the touch event now turned into a pan/drag. Usually, we can just treat this event as being the same as `onTapUp`.
```

> Now that we have a better understanding of `TapDetector` and the events that we will need to handle, lets implement it on the game:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have a better understanding of `TapDetector` and the events that we will need to handle, let's implement it on the game:
```

```dart
// We need to add our `TapDetector` mixin here
class MyGame extends Game with TapDetector {
  // Variables declaration, onLoad and render methods omited...

  @override
  void onTapDown(TapDownDetails details) {
    // On tap down we need to check if the event ocurred on the
    // button area. There are several ways of doing it, for this
    // tutorial we do that by transforming ours position and size
    // vectors into a dart:ui Rect by using the `&` operator, and
    // with that rect we can use its `contains` method which checks

>     // if a point (Offset) is inside that rect

Reviewer: again, we could mention (just in passing) Tapables here

Author: I prefer to leave this out on this tutorial, as I will mention this right on the next one

    final buttonArea = buttonPosition & buttonSize;

>     if (buttonArea.contains(details.localPosition)) {
>       isPressed = true;
>     }

Reviewer: we should also probably mention that, for simplicity, we are not properly handling multitap here.

and since we are not anyway, we can simplify this code a bit:

```suggestion
    isPressed = buttonArea.contains(details.localPosition);
```

Author: Fixed

  }

  // On both tap up and tap cancel we just set the isPressed
  // variable to false
  @override
  void onTapUp(TapUpDetails details) {
    isPressed = false;
  }

  @override
  void onTapCancel() {
    isPressed = false;
  }

  // Finally, we just modify our update method so the animation is
  // updated only if the button is pressed
  @override
  void update(double dt) {
    if (isPressed) {
      runningRobot.update(dt);
    }
  }
}
```

If we run our game again, we should have the full example running, with our on/off button for our little vampire robot.

> And we are finished on this tutorial, now with an understanding of sprites, animations and gestures we can start on building more interactive and beautiful games.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And with that, we finished this tutorial. Now, with an understanding of sprites, animations and gestures, we can start on building more interactive and beautiful games.
```
